noted that you know still most of the cadets were involved in building bonfire now the average cadet i can't say spend a lot of hours out there on the bonfire but most of them spent some time and some of them a lot of time and but i noted that a lot of the civilian or non-core students were involved in bonfire the the
The non-core dormitories had pretty big organizations that were very involved in bonfire.
You didn't have any official responsibility for a bonfire, did you?
No.
And during those 10 years, there were no major bonfire incidents, problems, injuries, weren't there?
Well, I remember one or two suits that were pending while I was, some of them,
even before I came of injuries where a log fell on a vehicle or someone got a leg hurt out there, a suit I believe was pending on that.
I remember one or two things like that I'd say are probably major problems.
All right, then academically we had fall semester commencements, spring commencement, summer commencement.
Did we have commissioning at all three of those when you got back?
Yes.
So you had to be at those.
I attended all the graduations and commissioning things.
I was invited to the three graduation ceremonies.
I did that for all the years I was over there.
And commissioning, we'd do a little short commissioning in the summer and fall, in conjunction with the summer and fall graduations.
And I'd get up and give about a three minute little commissioning speech and then they'd call the names and I'd stand there and present them their certificate and the president was there and all that.
but then in May we had a separate commissioning ceremony for the cadets just for the cadets had been a long tradition here in old days I guess most everybody graduated in May and was commissioned in May but nowadays there are about as many in the fall as there are in the summer but we still have this separate commissioning in the spring and we invite
a senior military officer to come and be the speaker and it rotates among the services.
Usually we're trying to get a four star officer to come and be the commissioning speaker.
We think it merits that kind of attention and support and a lot of years we have had that.
Was it your task to identify and make that invitation?
I was involved in it.
I would, the services would know which one
had it this year for example.
And I'd work with that service.
I'd talk with the colonel here and we'd go over names and suggestions.
Sometimes I knew people from my past that I knew personally that I could call on.
Sometimes we just relied on them to identify.
Sometimes they had someone that they wanted to identify.
Now my last
semester as Commandant in May of 96, the president asked me to be, to my surprise, we had planned on a visiting speaker and we hadn't really extended the invitation, but when I forwarded the paperwork over saying who we wanted to invite, they turned it around and said, we want you to, I guess John Coltis was the perpetrator of that maybe, I don't know.
I guess he was.
Anyway.
How did you feel doing that?
Well, I felt very honored to do that and it gave me an opportunity to reflect on my nine years as Commandant and what I thought were some worthwhile points.
Nothing fancy or spectacular about that, but it was a real honor for me to be asked to be the speaker on that occasion.
To my surprise, a little after that, essentially my speech ended up reprinted in the Air Force Times.
Oh, good.
And I've had four-star officers call me since then to ask me if they could use that in something they were doing.
What were the primary points you made that... Well, I just reminisced a little bit, but mainly it was just ten points not
just 10 points for them to consider as officers.
I just discussed those a little bit, but they're pretty standard, straightforward things.
We left out final review.
That's done only in the spring, isn't it?
Only in the spring, after the commissioning ceremony on the same day, on Saturday afternoon.
What makes that special?
Well, there's several things, I think, but it's the culmination of one's four years in the Corps and of the close association they're going to have with these same people.
Not that they won't.
They still stay involved with them, but they've become so close and so tight that it's something special to say goodbye to something that you've been a,
been deeply involved in and with people that are your very dearest friends.
It's that kind of thing.
I think it's the Aggie spirit has been totally spread upon them and it's just a very special time.
And I can recall I first came here there was a move to do away with
exemptions for seniors for final exam always until then we'd had this graduation and commissioning actually the week in before finals because the seniors didn't have to take finals and so they could graduate and we could mission do all that stuff on the Saturday before and we'd have final review and then finals the next week they said we don't do that anymore you know we're going to have to have
graduation here after finals and we had a lot of meetings and a lot of hard discussion about how we're going to work this how's this going to work we were concerned then in those meetings that by putting final review out here after final exams are over the students have all gone all gone home that people just won't come for final review you know it'll be essentially an empty campus and
No one's here.
Well, to our surprise, it didn't affect the crowd one bit.
There's still going to be 15,000 people or whatever that number is out there for final review.
If you had it six weeks after graduation, I do believe.
It is such a draw that these people are going to come.
The families just love to come and see that son or daughter move from freshman to sophomore status.
It's such an achievement for them.
They wait all year just to make that one little move.
And of course, juniors, you know, to put on those senior boots the second time around, I don't know anything that's much more powerful than that in drawing a crowd.
In all the years that you have seen Final Review, more than four decades now, has that feeling changed much?
I think it's intensified, if anything.
I'm sure it had.
I don't think Final Review had quite the meaning for us 50 years ago as it does today.
It has become more ingrained something that's just certain to draw people and a lot of interest.
And they'll fight to get out there to try to grab the seat or a place, a position.
They'll mark off their place early.
And you know it's usually out on the Simpson drill field, that's the normal place.
Now there's been some times it's been over in Kyle Field, like this year it was in Kyle Field.
they're finishing a new review stand over on the parade field so they didn't hold it there this year it was in Kyle Field but mixed feelings about Kyle Field it's really a much nicer place and parents and others will tell you they enjoy it over in Kyle Field because they can sit down a lot of times they can be protected from the sun by the the press box area and all of that or
And they can just see much better than over on a flat drill field where they're sitting ground level.
They really like it.
But here in the early 90s, we had to demolish the old review stand and they went through a renovation of the grass, the turf on Simpson Field.
And there was a year or two that we couldn't get on the field.
And we went to Kyle Field.
And I thought, what a beautiful scene this is.
Just gorgeous in May.
Everything is bright, the colors, and the temperatures feels fairly reasonable.
You know, this would be a great place to have this every year, I thought.
Well, I started getting all this feedback from former students that suggested this is not the place to hold final review.
That traditionally it's on Simpson Field, this is where we want it.
Students told me they wanted it over there because they were hearing it from...
former students that that's where it's supposed to be so you know we we move back to uh simpson but simpson field but still most people will tell you even this year as a good example boy that is a beautiful scene there we like it over here
Then when school was out, did you have to go to any of the summer camps?
I didn't have to.
I visited a couple of them just to kind of familiarize myself.
I went to the Air Force camp over in San Antonio one year.
And then I went up to Fort Lewis, Washington, where most of the Army ROTC is now.
They have a special day during their camp where they invite educators from across the country to come and observe, and a very fine experience.
I was very impressed with what the Army did in Fort Lewis.
The Air Force did a good program, too, but the Army...
immerses the students a little deeper into leadership training I think I'd give them very high marks and it's a real plus for a student to have gone through that summer program that the Army puts on and the and the Air Force as well the Navy Marine Corps Marine Corps people go to Quantico sometime a very tough program I've not been there while they were conducting but I've been to Quantico and seen some of this training the Navy program is pretty much
being on board a ship for so many days or weeks during the summer.
Just generally being exposed to ship life and sea duty.
During those 10 years what did you do for relaxation?
For relaxation?
Well, I enjoyed all the sporting events at A&M.
I still do.
And I don't miss many basketball, football, baseball games.
I enjoy those very much.
That's a form of relaxation.
I played a little golf.
I'm not too much of that.
No hunting, no fishing.
All fishing.
I've gotten into that in recent years.
I love to fish.
but really I didn't have time for that stuff.
There wasn't much time for those kind of things.
Commandant job is a seven day, 24 hour day job.
It requires that kind of effort and that was one thing I didn't understand before I came here.
I thought this would be a very comfortable job without any real pressures.
my years in the military, I was kind of looking forward to a low pressure, comfortable kind of job, and I found it was 180 degrees from what I thought it would be.
In time consumption, number of hours that the job required, how did it compare with being a senior Air Force?
It required more time than I spent.
I thought I spent a lot of time in the military.
doing my thing, but this job took up even more of my time.
I always brought work home at night.
I'd frequently sit at my table till 11 or 1130 at night.
There's so many activities and things during the day, and you could never keep a schedule.
You know, I'd have some things I've planned to do, some meetings and things, but frequently you come in
8 o'clock and there's a story about a shooting or their story about some other incident and you have to drop everything and to put your full effort toward that initially anyway lots of paperwork to do lots of things to review and again this people would drop in unexpected parents come they want to see about something and I always tried to respond to those things that
You can say, no, he's not available, but I want to be available.
I wanted to be out around the Corps.
I spent a lot of time during the daytime visiting in the Corps, go to the dining hall, go watch the band practice.
I learned in the military your people want to see you.
They want you to be approachable.
They want you to understand what they're doing.
And they want a little praise and a little pat on the back, a little recognition that you notice what they're doing.
It works in spades.
I've seen it so many times.
People down at the bottom doing insignificant things sometimes just need the boss to come around and say, hey, you know, you're doing important stuff here.
Appreciate what you're doing.
I learned that worked, but it's a little different in the Corps, but still the cadets wanted to see it.
You know, for me to go out and watch the fish drill team march around or see them off or the band to go with them on a trip, those kind of things are terribly important in my opinion.
I would go to the dining hall two or three times a week to eat with the cadets.
And I didn't go to socialize or...
uh you know just be with some some of my peers on the staff or anything I want to sit with the cadets mainly the freshman cadets and I found that going to the dining hall it doesn't take a freshman very long to learn a little bit about rank and you know they know you're somebody up here then the commandant is a name that they've all heard and
I would just pull in and find me a good open seat next to some freshmen and sit down with them and, you know, they would start kind of rolling their eyes and looking out of the corner of their eyes at me and wondering, I'd introduce myself to them and they would too, but, you know, they really wondered what is he up to and, you know, what's he, they were afraid that I was going to
I don't know, give them some tasking or straighten them out or discipline them or something.
They, you know, a little bit scared of me being there.
But you could sit down and in a short period of time you could put them at ease.
You could gain their confidence, let them know that you're really interested in them.
You're not there to badger them or harass them.
You know, you're a friend.
And it's amazing what they will tell you.
I can find out
pretty much what's going on.
I hear all the rumors and things that are going on and you can gauge how much your programs are penetrating down to their level.
If they're not getting it, if they're not understanding it, then there's something wrong.
So easy to spot some problems that way.
And again, you have to understand their world.
They're trying to survive as a student, as a cadet, to get their shoes shined right, and you know, is my brass on right, and I know my campo, and all these little things don't seem like big stuff to people that are 50, 60, 70 years old, but to an 18-year-old cadet, it's very important.
Did athletics ever become a complicating factor for the Commandant?
Athletics, I'm not, you mean?
Did anybody ever put you on pressure for anything relating to athletics or anything, a coach or?
Put, no.
Oh, okay.
No, it does recall, remind me of one thing.
I guess I'd been, I guess it was 88 that Coach Sherrill left under somewhat of a cloud there.
Again, going to the football games, I saw the Regents and had conversations with several of them there.
And some of them were pretty closely aligned to Coach Sherrill.
They'd been responsible, I guess, for help bringing him here.
I don't know all the story there, but things sort of turned down for Coach Sherrill in 88, I believe he was.
And Dr. Mobley was new president.
And we're always out there in the box together for the ball games on the reviewing stand, not the coach, but president, the regents, and all.
And we all had a great affection for
winning and the football team of course and it became apparent that Cheryl might be forced out and I didn't know all the behind goings on but I remember the hurricane bowl we called it we were supposed to play Alabama earlier in the season here and it came the hurricane and
They postponed the game because of a threat of that weather.
It never really materialized, but they postponed it until after the Thanksgiving game.
So it was early in December, as I recall.
We played Alabama here at Kyle Field, last game of the season.
And they beat us pretty good, I remember that.
But before that game, I remember one of the regents talking to me about we need to do something
to save Coach Sherrill.
And there was a suggestion that we, that I rally all the Corps together and we go over to the athletic dorm and have a Yale practice and say something in support of, all in the name of Coach Sherrill and his support to try to show the campus that we're united in keeping Coach Sherrill.
And golly, I thought, this is one I don't want in the middle of.
But he was, this one Regent was pressing me pretty hard to do something, but things moved fairly quickly and that never came to be and I didn't hear any more about that.
Any other similar pressures from
Regents or former student or legislators where they were trying to get you to do something which you thought was inappropriate in your task?
No, I can't offhand think of anything, you know, inappropriate, any other thing inappropriate.
All right, let's go to the positive then.
Some examples of where individuals helped you and or the Corps in a splendid manner.
Well, John Sharp is a good example.
One of my favorites.
This has been back in the early 90s, somewhere in there, but I got word that through one of our Corps supporters who was a friend of John Sharp's that he was
willing to help support some act through the legislature that would give A&M a number of scholarships for military students for the National Guard.
And I've, well, that sounds like a pipe dream to me, but I don't know.
But, you know, the more I got into it and found out about it, yes, John Sharp had agreed to help sponsor this thing that would end up with us getting...
dozens of full running scholarships paid by the state and I talked with John about it he came over to A&M we had a press conference and he sort of unfolded his plan on this thing and I it was well received here he didn't put all the details to it but he was the guy that stood up and said this is what we want and I remember
I picked him up at the airport or somewhere and brought him over to campus and he told me privately how much he wanted this and how much he thought of A&M and the Corps and the military and you know he was fully committed to this thing to getting it through.
Then they had some hearings over in the legislature in Austin and
They thought it might be well if I went over there.
I couldn't lobby or anything like that as a representative of A&M.
But just to show up and sign the register that I was there and all would maybe lend some support to this thing is before the Senate Appropriations Committee that we're having that hearing.
And Senator Motford, who is now at Texas Tech, was the chairman of that committee.
Very nice man.
I really liked him.
Very kind to us, but he opened the hearing and I was just sitting out there in the gallery with the regular spectators.
I did have my uniform on though, but he recognized me.
He was a former Marine, he said.
But he called me up to the witness chair.
Asked me to come on up there, so I did.
And they proceeded to ask me questions about this thing.
just asked me questions and you know I tried to explain I hadn't been the sponsor of this I'd just been briefed on it but I was there to lend support John Sharp is a guy that got all this started and thanks to his effort we got it say we and they passed this thing and we did get the scholarship pro established which is a very good one that first hearing though Senator Rodney Ellis was on that committee and
He thought it was too pro-A&M.
You know, it gave too many benefits to us and not enough to some other places like Prairie View.
And he didn't think it included wordage in there that appropriately recognized minority scholarships and all that.
And he wanted us to go back and work on that.
And we went back and we worked in the... Senator Jim Turner from Crockett over here was...
was the main guy in the Senate he was on that committee he was our friend and very supportive another very fine fellow in my opinion I was impressed the way he worked with us on this thing but anyway we put some words to it and I went back for another hearing over there again not as a witness but I get called up to the chair to answer questions but that passed and we ended up getting something like
65 to 70 scholarships.
Wow, that's great.
And it had to be funded by the legislature.
And John Sharp was a comptroller, and he certified that money was available to pay for it.
Great.
But since he left and all, the legislature has not appropriated the money for these.
So the program has pretty much run out right now.
I've gotta be over at five o'clock over at the Bush Center and I think we've got maybe another half hour to do.
People off campus, I had some and I'm drawing a blank to start on that, let me see.
Well I mentioned John Sharp helped us with this scholarship program.
It's a National Guard scholarship program.
And I thought that was very interesting.
That was an initiative that started completely independent of anything on the campus, any person here.
But John had a definite interest in the Corps and saw this as an opportunity.
Senator Jim Turner, then a state senator, was co-sponsored.
Well, he was the sponsor of the legislation.
Sharp was the comptroller.
Senator Turner was very helpful and I got an opportunity to know him a little bit through that and later visited a time or two with him and he still sends me a Christmas card, a nice Christmas card every year but I thought Jim Turner was a very fine fellow.
Now I'm assuming that during these years one of the difficulties you and your colleagues had to cope with was that cuts in the federal budget
meant that there was less funding for ROTC programs and less demand at the federal level for new second lieutenants and ensigns.
can't say that it was less funding actually I think funding per student probably has gone up over the years I know it has in recent years because they put a lot of the federal government has put a lot of money into recruiting just to bring these people in and what these students get today from the federal government who under contract is pretty amazing scholarship ROTC scholarships but
The funding has not really gone down from the federal government, but the demand for officers, of course, is far off.
And I think I may have mentioned before, one year back in the 50s, I think we had 100,000 students across the country in Air Force ROTC, and it's probably a tenth or less of that today to indicate how sharply the program has declined over the years.
but the military has cut roughly 40% over the last 10 years and that means fewer people needed than through the commissioning process.
The academies have cut a little bit, but they're essentially where they were, around 4,000 students at each of those service academies.
They took a little cut, but ROTC took a much bigger cut, as I recall.
And nationally,
we would have seen the effects of that.
There were no institutions that were unusual in not being affected by those.
No, I think about every institution was affected by that.
The number of scholarships, ROTC scholarships that were available, and the Air Force, which I was, it was my parent service.
I know the pilot slots, the opportunity for students to graduate with a commission, go into flying school, essentially dried up.
We didn't need all these pilots right after the desert storm thing.
So they cut back production, closed down flying schools, and in hindsight that wasn't a real good move.
We end up kind of chasing things out there.
We've been through this cyclic thing many times over the years.
Now in your years here as Commandant did in our ROTC programs, was the enrollment decline about the same in all of the branches?
Was one hit harder than the other?
It wasn't an even drawdown, I would say.
When I came here, Air Force ROTC was the strongest of the three services that we had here, or branches, by far.
They did little to recruit and were able to bring people in every year.
It was kind of a natural thing.
People would sign up.
Flying and space and all that thing had a glamour to it that seemed to attract
kids and having, as I said before, maybe up to 50% of our freshmen saying they wanted to be engineers.
There just seemed to be a gravitation toward the Air Force.
The Army ROTC program was rather weak when I came here, and I don't know all the reasons for that, but anyway, I saw the Army program get stronger while I was here and became the biggest of the
programs in the Air Force went into decline.
A lot of it had to do with no flying slots for people, cut back in scholarships, only commissioning people into active duty requirements.